docs/site/src/content/blog/choosing-the-right-claude-model.md, before:

---
slug: "choosing-the-right-claude-model"
title: "Choosing the Right Claude Model for Your Task"
description: "Compare Opus, Sonnet, and Haiku for coding tasks. Match the model to the complexity and save money without sacrificing quality."
date: "2026-01-17"
author: "Max Ritter"
tags: [Guide, Models]
readingTime: 4
keywords: "Claude models comparison, Claude Opus, Claude Sonnet, Claude Haiku, Claude Code model selection, AI model pricing"
---

# Choosing the Right Claude Model for Your Task

Claude Code supports multiple models with different strengths. Picking the right one for each task saves money and gets better results.

## Available Models

| Model | Best For | Speed | Cost |
|-------|---------|-------|------|
| **Opus 4.6** | Complex architecture, multi-file refactors, debugging | Slower | Higher |
| **Sonnet 4.5** | General development, most coding tasks | Fast | Medium |
| **Haiku 4.5** | Quick lookups, simple edits, formatting | Fastest | Lowest |

## When to Use Each

### Opus 4.6

Use for tasks that require deep reasoning:

- Designing system architecture from scratch
- Debugging complex race conditions or state management issues
- Multi-file refactors that need to maintain consistency
- Understanding and modifying unfamiliar codebases
- Writing complex algorithms

Opus thinks more carefully and catches subtle issues that faster models miss.

### Sonnet 4.5

The default for most work:

- Implementing features from clear specifications
- Writing tests
- Code reviews
- Documentation
- Standard bug fixes
- API endpoint implementation

Sonnet 4.5 handles 90% of coding tasks well. Start here unless you have a reason to upgrade.

### Haiku 4.5

Use for high-volume, low-complexity tasks:

- Formatting and style fixes
- Simple variable renames
- Generating boilerplate
- Quick file lookups
- Answering factual questions about the codebase

Haiku is 10x cheaper than Opus. For simple tasks, it's equally accurate and much faster.

## Switching Models

Change models mid-session with `/model`:

```
/model opus     # Switch to Opus for complex work
/model sonnet   # Back to Sonnet for implementation
/model haiku    # Haiku for quick tasks
```

Or set a default in settings:

```json
{
  "model": "claude-sonnet-4-5-20241219"
}
```

## Cost Optimization Strategy

1. **Start with Sonnet** — It handles most tasks
2. **Escalate to Opus** — When you hit complexity (deep bugs, architecture)
3. **Drop to Haiku** — For bulk simple operations
4. **Use sub-agents wisely** — Pilot uses Haiku for review sub-agents where appropriate

## Context Window

All current Claude models support 200K token context windows. Opus 4.6 also has a 1M token context beta for extremely large codebases. For most projects, 200K is sufficient — Pilot's Endless Mode handles the rest.

## Key Insight

The best model isn't always the most expensive one. Match the model to the task complexity and you'll get faster results at lower cost.

Commit message:

feat: Compaction-based Endless Mode, friction fixes, and rules overhaul
Replace Endless Mode's kill-and-restart cycle with Claude Code's built-in
compaction mechanism using PreCompact and SessionStart(compact) hooks for
seamless context preservation and restoration.

Key changes:
- New PreCompact hook captures session state to Pilot Memory before compaction
- New SessionStart(compact) hook re-injects plan state, task progress, and
  working files after compaction completes
- Wrapper stripped of all Endless Mode restart logic, retains license/update/
  crash-recovery duties only
- Installer no longer overwrites user settings — uses project-level config
- Rules consolidated from 20+ files into 10 focused modules (cli-tools,
  development-practices, research-tools, testing, verification, etc.)
- /spec commands streamlined with clearer phase dispatch and verification
- Tool redirect hook updated with relaxed agent tooling restrictions
- Context monitor simplified by removing unreliable session ID cross-checks
- Blog content updated to reflect compaction-based architecture
- Website copy refreshed across all sections

Plans: docs/plans/2026-02-16-compaction-based-endless-mode.md
       docs/plans/2026-02-16-issue-54-friction-fixes.md

docs/site/src/content/blog/choosing-the-right-claude-model.md, after:

---
slug: "choosing-the-right-claude-model"
title: "Choosing the Right Claude Model for Your Task"
description: "Compare Opus, Sonnet, and Haiku for coding tasks. Match the model to the complexity and save money without sacrificing quality."
date: "2026-01-17"
author: "Max Ritter"
tags: [Guide, Models]
readingTime: 4
keywords: "Claude models comparison, Claude Opus, Claude Sonnet, Claude Haiku, Claude Code model selection, AI model pricing"
---

# Choosing the Right Claude Model for Your Task

Claude Code supports multiple models with different strengths. Picking the right one for each task saves money and gets better results.

## Available Models

| Model | Best For | Speed | Cost |
|-------|---------|-------|------|
| **Opus 4.6** | Complex architecture, multi-file refactors, debugging | Slower | Higher |
| **Sonnet 4.5** | General development, most coding tasks | Fast | Medium |
| **Haiku 4.5** | Quick lookups, simple edits, formatting | Fastest | Lowest |

## When to Use Each

### Opus 4.6

Use for tasks that require deep reasoning:

- Designing system architecture from scratch
- Debugging complex race conditions or state management issues
- Multi-file refactors that need to maintain consistency
- Understanding and modifying unfamiliar codebases
- Writing complex algorithms

Opus thinks more carefully and catches subtle issues that faster models miss.

### Sonnet 4.5

The default for most work:

- Implementing features from clear specifications
- Writing tests
- Code reviews
- Documentation
- Standard bug fixes
- API endpoint implementation

Sonnet 4.5 handles 90% of coding tasks well. Start here unless you have a reason to upgrade.

### Haiku 4.5

Use for high-volume, low-complexity tasks:

- Formatting and style fixes
- Simple variable renames
- Generating boilerplate
- Quick file lookups
- Answering factual questions about the codebase

Haiku is 10x cheaper than Opus. For simple tasks, it's equally accurate and much faster.

## Switching Models

Change models mid-session with `/model`:

```
/model opus     # Switch to Opus for complex work
/model sonnet   # Back to Sonnet for implementation
/model haiku    # Haiku for quick tasks
```

Or set a default in settings:

```json
{
  "model": "claude-sonnet-4-5-20241219"
}
```

## Cost Optimization Strategy

1. **Start with Sonnet** — It handles most tasks
2. **Escalate to Opus** — When you hit complexity (deep bugs, architecture)
3. **Drop to Haiku** — For bulk simple operations
4. **Use sub-agents wisely** — Pilot uses Haiku for review sub-agents where appropriate

## Context Window

All current Claude models support 200K token context windows. Opus 4.6 also has a 1M token context beta for extremely large codebases. For most projects, 200K is sufficient — Pilot's auto-compaction and persistent memory handle the rest.

## Key Insight

The best model isn't always the most expensive one. Match the model to the task complexity and you'll get faster results at lower cost.
