pilot/rules/cli-tools.md, before:

## CLI Tools

### Pilot CLI

The `pilot` binary is at `~/.pilot/bin/pilot`. Do NOT call commands not listed here.

**Session & Context:**

| Command | Purpose |
|---------|---------|
| `pilot check-context --json` | Get context usage % (informational only) |
| `pilot register-plan <path> <status>` | Associate plan with session |

**Worktree:** `pilot worktree detect|create|diff|sync|cleanup|status --json <slug>`

Slug = plan filename without date prefix and `.md`. `create` auto-stashes uncommitted changes.

**License:** `pilot activate <key>`, `pilot deactivate`, `pilot status`, `pilot verify`, `pilot trial --check|--start`

**Other:** `pilot greet`, `pilot statusline`

**Do NOT exist:** ~~`pilot pipe`~~, ~~`pilot init`~~, ~~`pilot update`~~

---

### MCP-CLI

Access custom MCP servers through the command line.

| Source | Location | Context Cost |
|--------|----------|-------------|
| Pilot Core | `.claude/pilot/.mcp.json` | Always loaded (context7, mem-search, web-search, web-fetch, grep-mcp) |
| Claude Code | `.mcp.json` | Tool defs enter context when triggered |
| mcp-cli | `mcp_servers.json` | **Zero** — only CLI output enters context |

**Rule of thumb:** Servers with >10 tools → `mcp_servers.json`. Lightweight → `.mcp.json`.

| Command | Output |
|---------|--------|
| `mcp-cli` | List all servers and tools |
| `mcp-cli <server>` | Show tools with parameters |
| `mcp-cli <server>/<tool>` | Get JSON schema |
| `mcp-cli <server>/<tool> '<json>'` | Call tool |

Add `-d` for descriptions, `-j` for JSON, `-r` for raw. Stdin for complex JSON: `mcp-cli server/tool - <<EOF ... EOF`

**Routing:** Pilot core servers → direct tool calls via ToolSearch. User servers → `mcp-cli`. Run `/sync` after adding servers.

---

### Vexor — Semantic Code Search

First choice for codebase exploration. Find files by intent, not exact text. Outperforms Explore sub-agents on large codebases — zero context cost until you read results, no token waste from sub-agent transcripts.

Important: Set `timeout: 60000` on Bash as indexing can happen, never run in background.

```bash
vexor "<QUERY>" [--path <ROOT>] [--mode <MODE>] [--ext .py,.md] [--exclude-pattern <PATTERN>] [--top 5]
```

| Mode | Best For |
|------|----------|
| `auto` | Default — routes by file type |
| `code` | Code-aware chunking (best for codebases) |
| `outline` | Markdown headings (best for docs) |
| `full` | Full file contents (highest recall) |

First search builds index automatically. `vexor index` to pre-build, `vexor index --clear` to rebuild.

Commit message:

feat: model selection settings, Apple Silicon Vexor acceleration, and worktree sync fixes (#62)
* fix: Added Apple Silicon Acceleration for Vexor Semantic Search

* feat: implement spec/model-selection-settings

* feat: implement spec/model-selection-settings

* fix: remove auto-stash from worktree sync, fix CWD shell issue, require clean working tree

* chore: untrack plan file (gitignored)

* feat: set default models to Sonnet 4.6, add prettier and golangci-lint installer support

* fix: model selection settings — injection paths, UI, build, and test isolation

- Fix command injection writing to wrong path (~/.claude/pilot/commands/
  instead of ~/.claude/commands/)
- Inject model into global ~/.claude/settings.json so Console settings
  always override installer three-way merge
- Add model_config.py, settings_injector.py, tips.py to Cython MODULE_ORDER
- Fix multi-line import strip regex eating next line's indentation
- Restore accidentally deleted statusline/tips.py
- Fix TS2556 spread argument error in settings-routes test
- Default model changed to Opus 4.6
- Reorganize Settings UI: General + Spec Flow sections, default column,
  sticky save bar, collapsible pricing, 1M subscription note
- Remove ModelRoutingInfo from Usage page, increase chart height
- Add Settings screenshot to website console carousel
- Mock get_max_context_tokens in tests for environment isolation
- Update research-tools rule for WebFetch/WebSearch blocking

pilot/rules/cli-tools.md, after:

## CLI Tools

### Pilot CLI

The `pilot` binary is at `~/.pilot/bin/pilot`. Do NOT call commands not listed here.

**Session & Context:**

| Command | Purpose |
|---------|---------|
| `pilot check-context --json` | Get context usage % (informational only) |
| `pilot register-plan <path> <status>` | Associate plan with session |

**Worktree:** `pilot worktree detect|create|diff|sync|cleanup|status --json <slug>`

Slug = plan filename without date prefix and `.md`. `create` auto-stashes uncommitted changes.

**License:** `pilot activate <key>`, `pilot deactivate`, `pilot status`, `pilot verify`, `pilot trial --check|--start`

**Other:** `pilot greet`, `pilot statusline`

**Do NOT exist:** ~~`pilot pipe`~~, ~~`pilot init`~~, ~~`pilot update`~~

---

### Vexor — Semantic Code Search

**⛔ First choice for codebase search — always try before Grep, Glob, or Explore sub-agents.** Finds by intent, not exact text. Zero context cost until you read results.

Set `timeout: 60000` — indexing can happen on first run. Never run in background.

```bash
vexor "<QUERY>" [--path <ROOT>] [--mode <MODE>] [--ext .py,.md] [--exclude-pattern <PATTERN>] [--top 5]
```

| Mode | Best For |
|------|----------|
| `auto` | Default — routes by file type |
| `code` | Code-aware chunking (best for codebases) |
| `outline` | Markdown headings (best for docs) |
| `full` | Full file contents (highest recall) |

`vexor index` to pre-build, `vexor index --clear` to rebuild.

---

### MCP-CLI

Access custom MCP servers through the command line.

| Source | Location | Context Cost |
|--------|----------|-------------|
| Pilot Core | `.claude/pilot/.mcp.json` | Always loaded (context7, mem-search, web-search, web-fetch, grep-mcp) |
| Claude Code | `.mcp.json` | Tool defs enter context when triggered |
| mcp-cli | `mcp_servers.json` | **Zero** — only CLI output enters context |

**Rule of thumb:** Servers with >10 tools → `mcp_servers.json`. Lightweight → `.mcp.json`.

| Command | Output |
|---------|--------|
| `mcp-cli` | List all servers and tools |
| `mcp-cli <server>` | Show tools with parameters |
| `mcp-cli <server>/<tool>` | Get JSON schema |
| `mcp-cli <server>/<tool> '<json>'` | Call tool |

Add `-d` for descriptions, `-j` for JSON, `-r` for raw. Stdin for complex JSON: `mcp-cli server/tool - <<EOF ... EOF`

**Routing:** Pilot core servers → direct tool calls via ToolSearch. User servers → `mcp-cli`. Run `/sync` after adding servers.
